# 2. Scaffolding

## Install Create-React-App
We will need to use the Node Package Manager (``npm``) to install ``create-react-app``, the React scaffolding tool.  
From the terminal:
```bash
npm install -g create-react-app
```
``npm`` - We are running a Node Package Manager Command.  
``install`` - We are looking to install a package.  
``-g`` - We are installing a reusable global package, available outside the scope of just this project.  
``create-react-app`` - The name of the package we are installing.


## React Scaffold
We start by building out our core project structure using ``create-react-app``.  
From the terminal:
```bash
npx create-react-app bionet --use-npm
```
``npx`` - We are executing a global script.  
``create-react-app`` - The name of the global script.  
``bionet`` - The name of the React app we are scaffolding.  
``--use-npm`` - A flag to use ``npm`` for scaffolding rather than the ``yarn`` default.  
This command creates a new directory named `bionet` inside from where we ran the command in the terminal.  
This directory will be our 'project directory' or 'root directory' meaning our projects code is contained entirely inside this directory.  
Lets 'change directory' (`cd`) to the root directory to proceed with development.  
From the terminal:
```bash
cd bionet
```


## API Scaffold

### Add API Directory
The API is stored in its own separate directory `./api`, `.` indicating the root or project directory.  
Lets 'make directory' (`mkdir`) `./api`.  
From the terminal:
```bash
mkdir api
```

### Add Server File
The server file will be called `server.js` and will be found inside the `./api` directory.  
Let create the file with `touch`.  
From the terminal:
```bash  
touch api/server.js
```

### Add Express
We will be installing a node module, `express`, for use as a web server within `./api/server.js`.  
From the terminal:
```bash
npm i express
```
Note that `i` can be used as a shorthand instead of `install`.  
Installing with `npm` downloads and adds the module to the `./node_modules` directory, making the modules code available for use within the project, using `require('name-of-module')`.  
A dependency for `express` was also automatically added to the `package.json` file, which acts as a configuration file for your project, holding metadata, both production and development dependency manifests, build scripts, etc.

### Create Basic Express Server
Next we will write a basic `express` API with a single landing route.  
Add the following content to `./api/server.js`:
```js
const express = require('express'); // require express module
const api = express(); // instantiate or start express
const port = 3001; // port the app will listen on

api.get('/', (req, res) => { // http get request to landing page
  res.json({ // respond with json
    success: true,
    message: "Welcome to the Bionet API.",
    errors: [],
    data: {}
  });
});

api.listen(port, () => { // listen on port
  console.log(`API listening on localhost:${port}`);
});
```


### Test Server Works
To test the server code is working, we simply run `server.js` with `node`:
```bash
node api/server
```
If there were no errors, in the terminal you should see:
```bash
API listening on localhost:3001
```
The `.js` file extension is not required as `node` assumes you are running a javascript file.  
Load up your preferred web browser, Chrome or Firefox are preferred for later in this tutorial.  
In the web address bar, type in `localhost:3001` and hit enter.  You should see the JSON response from our new API in your web browser.

### Stop Server
To stop the server from running, in the terminal running the server instance type `Ctrl + C` or `Cmd + C`. You should see your terminal prompt return.

## Run React & API Concurrent
We will next configure our application to run both the React App and the API with a single command in the terminal.

### Install Concurrently
The node module `concurrently` allows you to run more than one script or process simultaneously on your applications runtime.  
We will use this to run our API (`server.js`) and our React scripts (`react-scripts start`) both at the same time.  
Install with `npm` from the terminal:
```bash
npm i --save-dev concurrently
```
``--save-dev`` - Save the module as a 'development dependency' meaning it is used by the environment or build but not the application itself.  

### Configure Concurrently
We configure `concurrently` by modifying the `scripts` portion of our `package.json` file.  
Change:
```js
// ...
  "scripts": {
    "start": "react-scripts start",
    "build": "react-scripts build",
    "test": "react-scripts test",
    "eject": "react-scripts eject"
  },
// ...  
```
To:
```js
// ...
  "scripts": {
    "start": "concurrently \"node api/server\" \"react-scripts start\"",
    "build": "react-scripts build",
    "test": "react-scripts test",
    "eject": "react-scripts eject"
  },
// ...
```

### Test Concurrently
We can test that our application works by running it from the terminal:
```bash
npm start
```
This should show both application running in your terminal:
```bash
> bionet@0.1.0 start /home/mstewart/bionet
> concurrently "node api/server" "react-scripts start"

API listening on localhost:3001
Starting the development server...

Compiled successfully!

You can now view bionet in the browser.

Local:            http://localhost:3000/
On Your Network:  http://192.168.1.74:3000/

Note that the development build is not optimized.
To create a production build, use npm run build.
```
Your default browser should open to the React application at `localhost:3000`.  
Opening another browser tab to `localhost:3001` should open to the API.

### Complete
Previous: [Environment](https://github.com/biobricks/bionet/blob/master/walkthrough/1.environment.md)  
Next: [Configure React](https://github.com/biobricks/bionet/blob/master/walkthrough/3.react.1.md)